The governing document will define why your organisation exists, what it intends to do and how it will do it.

It will also detail the purpose of your co-operative and its relationship both to its members and to the outside world.

Your governing document will contain information about all the practical matters related to how an organisation is run, including:

Its aims or objects and how they will be achieved;
Who the members are, how and why they can become members and how they meet and make decisions;
Whether there is a governing body, what it is called, how it is appointed and how it meets and makes decisions;
What happens to any surplus; and
What happens to assets when the organisation is sold, taken over or wound up.

Principle 1: Voluntary and Open Membership
A co-operative’s governing document must include a provision that clearly defines who its members are and their relationship with the co-operative.  Members are the owners of the co-operative and it must be voluntary - just because a person may be eligible to be a member of a particular co-operative doesn’t mean that they are required to become a member.  On the other hand if someone is eligible to be member, the co-operative must not create artificial barriers to them becoming a member.

Principle 2: Democratic Member Control
A co-operative’s governing document should include a provision that enable members to actively participate in the governance of the co-operative, typically through voting at general meetings on a one member one vote basis.

The co-operative’s governing document should include a provision that requires the majority of the governing body to be elected by and from the membership and mechanisms to hold the governing body to account when making key decisions about the business of the co‑operative.

The governing document should include a provision that sets out how any underlying assets will be dealt with in if it should wind up.  Typically, a common or co-ownership provision will be included.

Principle 3: Member Economic Participation
The co-operative’s governing document will include a provision that enables members to contribute to and control the capital of the co-operative.  Depending on the co-operative’s legal form, this may be through the holding of shares in the co-operative or by committing to a guarantee in the event the co-operative should wind up with outstanding debts.

Principle 4: Autonomy and Independence
Depending on the legal form, a co-operative must have more than one member, which may be individuals or organisations, or a combination of the two.

The governing document should include a provision that limits the rate of interest paid on money borrowed from members and other financial institutions.

Principle 5: Education, Training and Information
The co-operative’s governing document should reflect a commitment to educate and train its members about the values and principle of co-operation, what it means to be a member of their co-operative and provide the required training to enable them to actively participate as member of the co-operative.

The co-operative’s governing document should reflect a commitment to educate and train its governing body about their role and responsibilities and provide the required training to enable them to be an effective Board of their co-operative.

Principle 6: Co-operation among Co-operatives
The co-operative’s governing document should include provisions for what it will do with its surplus assets upon winding up, including the possibility that any assets may be transferred to another co-operative or to the Co-operative Movement. Often this Principle may only be mentioned in the governing document as an intention or something to aspire to once the co-operative is trading successfully.

Principle 7: Concern for Community
The co-operative’s governing document should set out the defined community it will benefit.  This may be a community of interest, a geographical community or society more widely.

Collective or committee management?
In smaller co-operative organisations, where all members are also members of the governing body, the strategic decision-making is typically undertaken by meetings of the entire membership. This style of collective management becomes harder as the size of the membership increases. Organisations with more than 12 to 15 members often move towards committee management, where the members elect a smaller governing body and delegate some of their powers to it.


Constituency governance
Multi-stakeholder co-operatives that bring together different interest groups may choose to have “constituencies” or different “classes” of members. Some multi-stakeholder co-operatives have weighted voting or preserved places on the governing body for each class to ensure a balance between the different interests. Others rely upon the mutual aims of the members of the co-operative to ensure all interests are taken into account by the governing body who are elected on a simple one-member one-vote basis across the whole membership, for example, in a leisure trust.

Some co-operatives who organise themselves into departments or teams have chosen to ensure there are representatives of each team or department on their governing body.  This is often referred to as a “hub and spoke” model of governance.

Ex-officio
The governing body may include ex-officio members, whereby an individual is entitled to a position on the governing body by virtue of the position they hold. For example, the members of a community co-operative may want their General Manager to have a place on the governing body.

Independent Directors
Co-operatives can choose to co-opt independent directors onto their governing body where particular expertise or skills are required.  This can help to ensure a balanced board and also to fill skills gaps.

In a society, there is some prescription
as to what the rules must contain and
the Industrial and Provident Societies
Act 1965 does specify “matters to
be provided for” in a society’s rules.
These include:
the name of the society;
the objects of the society;
the address of the registered office
of the society;
the terms of admission of members;
the holding of meetings;
how the rules can be amended;
the appointment, removal and powers
of the committee of management;
determination of the interest on shares;
how the profits of the society are applied;
how the funds of the society can be
invested;
provision for the audit of accounts;
provisions relating to the types of,
registration of and withdrawal of
shares; and
other provisions relating to common
seals, deceased members, receiving
deposits etc.

A governing document will typically
contain clauses relating to:
The name of the organisation;
The objects of the organisation;
The powers of the organisation;
The personal liability of the members;
Membership of the organisation;
The governing body;
Meetings;
Application of surplus;
How the governing document can
be amended or replaced; and
Dissolution and the distribution
of assets of the organisation.

4.7: Objects
The objects of an organisation define
why it exists and what it will achieve.
Objects fall into two categories:
General objects define why the
organisation exists, for example:
to increase the consumption of locallygrown
food.
Specific objects define what it intends
to achieve, for example: the establishment
of local food co-operatives.

4.8: Powers
Powers are what the organisation can
do in order to achieve the objects. Powers
are generally left fairly broad so as not to
restrict the activities of the organisation,
but if no powers are stated then it is
assumed that the organisation is able to
use all lawful powers necessary. Banks
may require that your governing document
includes a stated power to borrow before
they will lend to you.
Examples of powers include the power to:
employ staff;
borrow money;
take out investments;
own property;
make payments to others;
take out insurance;
enter into contracts; and
enter into partnerships.


4.9: Statement of liability
This is a statement which defines the
limit of the personal liability of a member
in the event that the organisation is wound
up and is unable to pay its creditors.
Such a statement is unlikely in the
governing document of an unincorporated
organisation as the liability of members
is unlimited in that case.
In a company limited by guarantee,
the personal liability of the member is
limited to a fixed amount, typically £1
– the member, in effect, guarantees to pay
£1 in the event that the organisation is
wound up and is unable to meet its debts.
In a company limited by shares or a
society, the liability is limited to the value
of the paid up shares held by the member.

4.10.1: Who can be a member?
The governing document should define
who the members are and who is eligible
to apply for membership. For example,
it may state that someone is eligible for
membership if they meet one or several
of the criteria in the following list, which
is by no means exhaustive. Criteria
could include:
living or working in a particular area;
working for the organisation;
being a customer of the organisation;
investing in the organisation;
supporting the objects of the
organisation; or
participating in a certain activity.

4.10.2: How members join the
organisation
Membership of any organisation must
be voluntary – you can’t make someone
a member without their knowledge or
consent, but membership may be at the
discretion of the existing membership or
governing body. Some organisations have
a completely open membership, with those
who support the objects being accepted
into membership on application. Other
organisations have much more defined
and restrictive membership criteria. The
governing document may define an
application process or a subscription
payable on joining.
One of the International Co-operative
Alliance (ICA) principles is that
membership of a co-operative must be
“voluntary and open”. This is sometimes
misinterpreted to mean that anyone has
the right to join any co-operative. In some
co-operatives this may be the case, but not
always. The principle of open membership
is further defined by the ICA as:
“Co-operatives are voluntary
organisations, open to all persons able
to use their services and willing to accept
the responsibilities of membership,
without gender, social, racial, political
or religious discrimination.”
Therefore a co-operative does not
discriminate unfairly with regard to
who can be a member but can restrict
membership to a geographical area
or to a general class of persons or
organisations. For instance a consumer
co-operative by definition restricts its
membership to its customers whereas
a worker co-operative restricts its
membership to its employees. In the case
of a worker co-operative, the open
membership doesn’t mean that anyone
can demand a job, but rather that anyone
who is an employee of the co-operative
can become a member.
A co-operative may also close its
membership where it cannot service further
members. A classic example would be an
allotment society where the number of
members is limited to the number of plots.

4.10.3: How membership ceases
The governing document should also
define how a member leaves the
organisation, or ceases to be a member,
both voluntarily and involuntarily.
Typical routes to non-membership would
include:
death or winding up, where the member
is an organisation;
failure to pay any subscription (an
annual subscription is often used to
help manage the membership register);
resignation;
no longer satisfying the criteria for
membership, for example by leaving
employment in the case of the member
of a worker co-operative.

4.10.5: Legal responsibilities –
register of members
It is critical that an organisation knows
who its members are and when they cease
to be a member, not least because the
quorum required for a general meeting to
make legitimate decisions is often defined
as a percentage of the total membership.
It is impossible to know what the quorum
should be if you don’t know how many
members you’ve got. An organisation
also needs to know who to send notice
of general meetings to and who, at a
meeting, is eligible to vote. The passing
of a written resolution also requires that
you know how many members you have,
so that you know once 75% (or whatever
proportion is specified in the governing
document) of them have voted for
the resolution.
All companies must keep a register
of members but it is good practice for
any organisation to do so whether
legally required to or not. Membership
of a company carries certain rights and
responsibilities and, therefore, accurate
and up-to-date records must be kept to
ensure those who own the company
and have the right to vote are kept
informed of relevant company issues.
As a company, the organisation must keep
the following details for each member:
their name and address;
the date on which the person became
a member;
the date any person ceased
to be a member;
the class of membership, if appropriate;
the statement of shares held by each
member, if appropriate; and
the registered office address of any
corporate member.

The register of a society must contain:
members’ names and addresses;
dates they entered and/or left
membership;
officers’ names and addresses;
dates they entered and/or left
membership;
the number of shares held by each
member; and
a statement of any other property such
as loans or deposits held by the member.

Alternatively, you can create
an organisation run by a smaller group of
committed members who own and control
the organisation, with a “friends” of the
organisation category who have no
control of the organisation, but receive
a service such as a newsletter or
opportunities to attend social events
or work days. These “friends” of the
organisation are typically referred to
in the governing document as associate
members or supporter members.
Whichever option you choose,
it is important that people getting
involved with the organisation are
clear as to their degree of involvement,
control and ownership.

4.11: The governing body
The governing body is a group of people
who are delegated by the membership of
an organisation to undertake the strategic
management of that organisation. In a
co-operative or community enterprise they
are typically elected from the membership.
The members of the governing body, by
virtue of the fact that they act for the
members, have additional duties in law
over and above those of a member. This
section is concerned with the relationship
between members and the governing
body and those additional duties.

4.11.3: Who is eligible to serve on the
governing body?
The governing document should define
who can be a member of the governing
body. In a co-operative or community
enterprise, the governing body is typically
elected from within the membership,
although it is possible to appoint
governing body members who are
not members of the organisation.

4.11.4: Joining the governing body
The governing document should define
how to become a member of the
governing body. There are often several
ways that a governing body can recruit
or change its composition, to give it
maximum flexibility in maintaining a
balance of skills, diversity, democracy
and experience.
Typical routes into the governing body will
be defined in the governing document and
will include:
Election by and from the membership –
this is typically a prime function of the
annual general meeting;
Co-option on to the governing body by
the existing governing body – co-option
is often used to bring someone onto the
governing body with a particular skill or
expertise. This option is also often used
where an existing member of the
governing body steps down mid-term or
dies – a new governing body member is
appointed to fill the “casual vacancy”
without the need to hold a general
meeting. The governing document will
often define a maximum number or
proportion of governing body members
who can be co-opted at one time;
Ex-officio – the governing body may
include ex-officio members, whereby
an individual is entitled to a position
on the governing body by virtue of the
position they hold. For example, there
may be a place on the governing body
for the head of the local school, whoever
they are;
Appointment – a member organisation
appoints someone to serve on the
governing body and the governing
body has no choice but to accept
the appointment; and
Nomination – a member organisation
can nominate an individual to represent
them on the governing body, but in this
case the governing body can refuse the
nomination where they ould have to
accept an appointment.
